[Music]
it really is communities like this
especially given the times were about to
face that are gonna sustain it us
because when things get bad the elites
will retreat into their gated compounds
with amenities and services and security
that's denied to the rest of us and
they'll leave us on our own and we are
you know as Martin Buber understood it
is for those of us who endure it is
going to be a complete inversion of the
values of the consumer culture which I'm
going to speak about and it really is
going to be we are going to be are not
only our integrity but our ability to
endure will be measured by our capacity
to sustain our neighbor and that's
really what sanctuary is about which is
why I'm thrilled to be here and why I
admire the work you do so much the
American Empire is coming to an end the
US economy is being drained by wars in
the Middle East and vast military
expansion across the globe it is
burdened by growing deficits along with
the devastating effects of
deindustrialization and global trade
agreements our democracy has been
captured and destroyed by corporations
that steadily demand more tax cuts more
deregulation and impunity from
prosecution for massive acts of
financial fraud
all the while looting trillions from the
US Treasury in the form of bailouts the
nation has lost the power and respect
needed to induce a lie
in Europe Latin America Asia and Africa
to do its bidding add to this the
mounting destruction caused by climate
change and you have a recipe for an
emerging dystopia overseeing this
descent at the highest levels of the
federal and state governments is a
motley collection of imbeciles con
artists thieves opportunists and war
mongering generals
and yes I am also speaking about the
Democratic Party the Empire will limp
along steadily losing influence until
the dollar is dropped as the world's
reserve currency plunging the United
States into a crippling depression and
instantly forcing a massive contraction
of our military machine short of a
sudden and widespread popular revolt
which does not seem likely the death
spiral appears unstoppable meaning the
United States as we know it will no
longer exist within a decade or at most
to the global vacuum we leave behind
will be filled by China already
establishing itself as an economic and
military juggernaut or perhaps there
will be a multipolar world carved up
among Russia China India Brazil Turkey
South Africa and a few other states or
maybe the void will be filled as the
historian Alfred McCoy writes by a
collection of transnational corporations
multilateral military forces like NATO
and an international financial
leadership self-selected at Davos and
build a bird that will forge a
supranational Nexus to supersede any
nation or Empire under every measure
from financial growth and infrastructure
investment to advanced technology
including supercomputers space weaponry
and cyber warfare we are being rapidly
overtaken by the Chinese in April 2015
the US Department of Agriculture
predicted that the American economy
would grow by nearly 50 percent over the
next 15 years while China's economy is
predicted to triple and come close to
surpassing Americas by 2030 China became
the world's second largest economy in
2010 the same year it became the world's
leading manufacturing nation pushing
aside a United States that had dominated
the world's manufacturing for a century
the Department of Defense issued a sober
report at our own peril DOD risk
assessment in a post primacy world it
found that the US military and I quote
no longer enjoys an unassailable
position vs. state competitors and it no
longer can automatically generate
consistent and sustained local military
superiority at range McCoy predicts the
collapse will come by 2030 empires in
decay embrace an almost willful suicide
blinded by their hubris and unable to
face the reality of their diminishing
power they retreat into a fantasy world
where hard and unpleasant facts no
longer intrude they replace diplomacy
multilateralism and politics with
unilateral bombastic threats and the
blunt instrument of war this collective
self delusion saw the United States make
the greatest strategic blunder in its
history one that sounded the death knell
of the Empire the invasion
of Afghanistan and Iraq the architects
of the war in the George W Bush White
House and the array of useful idiots in
the press and academia who were
cheerleaders for it knew very little
about the country's being invaded were
stunningly naive about the effects of
industrial warfare and were blindsided
by the ferocious blowback they stated
and probably believed that Saddam
Hussein had weapons of mass destruction
although there was no valid evidence to
support this claim they insisted that
democracy would be implanted in Baghdad
and spread across the Middle East they
assured the public that US troops would
be greeted by grateful Iraqis and
Afghans as liberators they promised that
oil revenues would cover the cost of
reconstruction they insisted that bold
and quick military strikes shock and awe
would restore American hegemony in the
region and dominance in the world but it
did the opposite as speak now Brzezinski
noted this unilateral war of choice
against Iraq precipitated a widespread D
legitimation of u.s. foreign policy
historians of empire called these
military Fiasco's a feature of all late
empires micro militarism the Athenians
engaged in micro militarism when during
the Peloponnesian War they invaded
Sicily suffering the loss of 200 ships
and thousands of soldiers and triggering
revolts throughout the empire Britain
did this in 1956 when an attack Egypt in
a dispute over the nationalization of
the Suez Canal and then quickly had to
withdraw in humiliation empowering a
string of Arab nationalist leaders such
as Egypt's Gama Abdel Nasser and
British rule over the nation's few
remaining colonies neither of these
empires recovered while rising empires
are often judicious even rational in
their application of armed forced for
conquest and control of overseas
dominions fading empires are inclined to
ill-considered displays of power
dreaming of bold military master strokes
that would somehow recoup lost prestige
and power
McCoy writes often irrational even from
an imperial point of view these micro
military operations can yield
hemorrhaging expenditures or humiliating
defeats that only accelerate the process
already underway but empires need more
than force to dominate other nations
they need a mystique this mystique
always a mask for imperial plunder
repression and exploitation seduces some
native elites who become willing to do
the bidding of the imperial power or at
least remain passive and it provides a
patina of civility even nobility to
justify to those at home the costs and
blood and money needed to maintain
Empire the parliamentary system of
government that Britain replicated in
appearance in its colonies and the
introduction of British sports such as
polo cricket in horse racing along with
the elaborately uniformed viceroys and
the pageantry of royalty were buttress
by what the colonial said was the
invincibility of their Navy and their
army and England was able to hold this
Empire together from 1815 to 1914 before
being forced into a steady retreat
America's high blown rhetoric about
democracy liberty and equality
along with basketball baseball in
Hollywood as well as our own deification
of the military
entranced and cowed much of the globe in
the wake of World War two
behind-the-scenes of course the CIA used
its bag of dirty tricks to orchestrate
cooze fix elections and carry out
assassinations black propaganda
campaigns bribery blackmail intimidation
and of course torture but none of this
works anymore the photographs of
physical abuse and sexual humiliation
imposed on Arab prisoners at Abu Ghraib
inflamed the Muslim world
it fed al Qaeda and later Isis with
recruits the assassination of Osama bin
Laden he was unarmed it's called
assassination and a host of other
jihadist leaders including the US
citizen Anwar al-awlaki openly mocked
the concept of the rule of law the
hundreds of thousands of dead and
millions of refugees fleeing our
debacles in the Middle East along with a
near constant threat from militarized
aerial drones exposed us as state
terrorists we have replicated in the
Middle East the US military's penchant
for widespread atrocities indiscriminate
violence lies and fatal miscalculations
that led to our defeat in Vietnam the
brutality abroad is matched by a growing
brutality at home militarized police
gunned down mostly unarmed poor people
of color and fill a system of
Penitentiary's and jails that hold a
staggering 25% of the world's prisoners
although Americans represent only 5% of
the global population many of our cities
are in ruins our public transportation
is in shambles our educational system is
in steep decline and being privatized
opioid addiction suicide mass shootings
depression and morbid obesity plague a
population that has fallen into profound
despair
the deep disillusionment and anger that
led to Donald Trump's election a
reaction to the corporate coup d'etat
and the poverty afflicting at least half
the country have destroyed the myth of a
functioning democracy presidential
tweets and rhetoric celebrate hate
racism and bigotry and taunt the weak
and the vulnerable the president in an
address to the United States United
Nations threatened to obliterate North
Korea in an act of genocide we are
worldwide objects of ridicule and hatred
the foreboding for the future is
expressed in the rash of dystopian films
motion pictures that no longer
perpetuate American virtue and
exceptionalism or the myth of human
progress the loss of this mystique is
crippling it makes it hard to find
pliant surrogates to administer the
Empire as we have seen in Iraq and
Afghanistan the omnipotence empires
project masks the fragility of decayed
structures the expansion of empire
beyond the capacity of the homeland to
sustain the maintenance and costs of
Empire makes the system vulnerable
especially during a financial crisis
states that do not administer empires
are able to devote more of their
resources to domestic prosperity and
basic security but empires have no such
option and when revenues shrink empires
fracture and disintegrate without the
financing that arises almost organically
inside a sovereign nation empires are
famously predatory and their relentless
hunt for plunder or profit witnessed the
Atlantic slave trade
Belgium's rubber lust in the Congo
British India's opium Commerce the Third
Reich's rape of Europe or the Soviet
exploitation of Eastern Europe
McCoy writes
so delicate is their ecology of power
that when things start to go truly wrong
empires regularly unravel with on a holy
speed just a year for Portugal two years
for the Soviet Union
eight years for France 11 years for the
Ottomans seventeen for Great Britain and
in all likelihood just 27 years for the
United States counting from the crucial
year 2003 the loss of the dollar as the
global reserve currency will instantly
make it impossible for the United States
to pay for its huge deficits by selling
depressed Treasury bonds there will be a
massive rise in the cost of imports
unemployment will explode domestic
clashes over what McCoy calls in
substantial issues will fuel a dangerous
hyper nationalism that could morph into
an American fascism the Neo ISM and rage
sweeping across the globe are not
generated by warped ideologies or
medieval religious beliefs these
destructive forces have their roots in
the obliterating of social cultural and
religious traditions by modernization
and the consumer society the disastrous
attempts by the United States to carry
out regime change often through coos and
Wars and the utopian neoliberal ideology
that has concentrated wealth in the
hands of a tiny cabal of corrupt global
oligarchs the rage is directed at
discredited elites this vast global
project of social engineering during the
last century persuaded hundreds of
millions of people as Pankaj mishra
writes in the age of anger to renounce
and often scorned a world of the past
that had endured for thousands of years
and to undertake a gamble of creating
modern citizens who would be secular
enlightened culture and heroic
the project has been for all but a
handful of global elites a spectacular
failure the wretched of the earth is
Frantz Fanon all called them have been
shorn of any ideological or cultural
cohesion they are cut off from their
past they live in crushing poverty
numbing alienation hopelessness and
often terror mass culture feeds them the
tawdry the violent the salacious and the
ridiculous
and they are rising up against the
forces of modernization driven by an
atavistic fury to destroy the
technocratic world that condemns them
this rage is expressed in many forms
Hindu nationalism proto fascism jihadism
the Christian Right anarchic violence
and other beliefs but the various forms
of resistance spring from the same deep
wells of global despair and this
resentment is fueling a virulent
virulent nationalism xenophobia
chauvinism and violence poisoning the
civil discourse and feeling and assault
on basic civil liberties yet Western
elites rather than accept their
responsibility for the global anarchy
self-serving Lee define the clash as one
between the values of the enlightened
West and medieval barbarians they see in
the extreme nationalist religious
fundamentalists into hottests and
inchoate
and inexplicable irrationality that can
only be quelled with force they have yet
to grasp that the disenfranchised do not
hate us for our values they hate us
because of our duplicity use of
indiscriminate industrial violence on
their nation's and communities and our
hypocrisy the dispossessed
grasp the true message of the West to
the rest of the planet we have
everything and if you try to take it
away from us we will kill you the more
the Western elites are attacked the more
they to retreat into a mythological past
self flora fication and willful
ignorance the rise of hyper nationalism
expressed in the absurd slogan make
America great again the demonization of
Muslims are documented workers the
growing bellicosity of the state and the
attempt to blame foreign interference is
used as a mask to cover the root cause
of a discontent which is profound social
inequality which in the United States is
in the is the worst in the
industrialized world huge segments of
the world have been cast aside by
globalization treated in an age of
corporate capitalism as human refuse and
their rage is expressed in the kind of
anarchic and Neel istic violence that
characterized another era of vast
inequality the end of the 19th century
and the beginning of the 20th century
our rash of mass shootings at schools
churches concerts malls and cinemas are
a reaction to the lies fed to workers
across the globe by the architects and
ideologue of corporate capitalism these
lies fueled by an arms industry that is
saturated the country and the planet
with weapons have spawned homegrown
terrorists that have carried out
indiscriminate killings at the Boston
Marathon a South Carolina Church
Tennessee military facilities and a
Texas army base the proponents of
globalization promised to lift workers
across the planet into the middle class
and instill
democratic values and scientific
rationalism religious and ethnic
tensions would be alleviated or
eradicated the global marketplace would
create a peaceful prosperous community
of Nations all we had to do was get
government out of the way and kneel
before market demands held up as the
ultimate form of progress and
rationality neoliberalism in the name of
this absurd utopia stripped away
government regulations and laws that
once protected the citizen from the
worst excesses of predatory capitalism
it created trade agreements that allowed
trillions of corporate dollars to be
transferred off into offshore accounts
to avoid taxation jobs to flee to sweat
lops sweatshops in China and the global
south where workers live in conditions
that replicate slavery social service
programs and public services were
slashed or privatized mass culture
including schools and the press
indoctrinated an increasingly desperate
population to take part in the global
reality show of capitalism what we were
never told was that the game was fixed
we were always condemned to lose our
manufacturing migrated abroad General
Motors for example pays Mexican workers
in Monterrey $3 an hour without benefits
to make cars and trucks American workers
with unionized wages that came with
benefits were cast aside wages have
declined our working class is
impoverished endless war is a lucrative
business in the world's wealth has been
seized by global oligarchs kleptocracy
such as the one now installed in
Washington brazenly loot the nation's
wealth Democratic idealism
is a joke and we are knit together only
by Commerce and Technology forces that
Hanna Erin called negative solidarity
nowhere is this more true than with the
modern calls for jihad by self style
Islamic radicals most of them have no
religious training and who often come
out of the secularized criminal
underworld the jihadist leader Abu Musab
Zarqawi nicht I nicknamed the Sheikh of
slaughters in Iraq was before he became
a radical jihadist a pimp a drug dealer
and a heavy drinker the Afghan American
Omar Mateen reportedly was a frequenter
of the nightclub in Orlando Florida
where he massacred 49 people and had
been seen there drunk Anwar al-awlaki
who preached jihad and was eventually
assassinated by the United States at a
penchant for prostitutes Abu Mohammed Al
Adani a senior leader of the Islamic
state when he was killed
called on Muslims in the West to kill
any non-muslim they encountered these
are his words smash his head with a rock
or slaughter him with a knife or run him
over with your car or throw him down
from a high place or choke him or poison
him these crude and I would mention
deeply anti Islamic sentiments have far
more in common with Bakunin 's
propaganda by deed that characterized
the Neel ism of the late 19th century it
is an it is updated and amplified in
videos and live stream feeds and social
media this anarchic violence fill the
fills the void left by the destruction
of indigenous beliefs traditions and
rituals and as Mishra notes these
jihadists represent the death of
traditional Islam rather than its
resurrection it is this rage this
resentment at being left behind that
drives terrorist attacks in Paris London
and now New York
it is what led timothy mcveigh to bomb
the Alfred P murrah Federal Building in
Oklahoma City in 1995 killing 168 people
including 19 children and injuring 684
and when McVeigh was imprisoned in
Florence Colorado the prisoner in the
adjacent cell was ROM si Achmed Yusef
the mastermind of the first attack on
the World Trade Center in 1993 after
McVeigh was executed Yousef commented I
have never known anyone in my life who
has so similar a personality to my own
as his it is becoming harder and harder
to distinguish us from our enemies Trump
given the political economic and
cultural destruction carried out by
neoliberalism is not an aberration he is
the result of a market society and
capitalist democracy that has ceased to
function and angry and alienated
underclass is entranced by electronic
hallucinations that take the place of
literacy these Americans take a perverse
and almost diabolical delight in
demagogues such as Trump that expressed
contempt for and openly flout the
traditional rules and rituals of a power
structure that preys upon them similar
demagogues like Modi have risen up in
India the Philippines Poland Hungary and
other states and this is almost always a
characteristic of the final stage of the
some 69 empires that have risen and
fallen throughout human history
these demagogues and mythologize errs we
see them on Fox News and other
right-wing outlets askew truth for
historical and cultural myth
Reinhold Niebuhr called them the blind
fanatics of Western civilization who
regard the highly contingent
achievements of our culture as the final
form and norm of human existence the
unacknowledged reality is that the
process of modernization and
colonialization has been accompanied by
carnage and bedlam the rapacious
appetite of capitalists and imperialists
as mishra notes never considered such
constraining factors as finite
geographical space degradable natural
resources and fragile ecosystems and in
carrying out this project of global
expansion and modernization no form of
coercion or violence was off-limits
terrorist attacks such as the flying of
the hijacked planes into the World Trade
Center illustrate that those who oppose
us our products of our moral universe
they have been schooled well in the art
of modern warfare
the dramatic explosions the fireballs
the victims jumping to their deaths the
collapse of the two huge towers in
Manhattan were straight out of Hollywood
where else but from the industrialized
world did the suicide hijackers learn
that huge explosions and death above a
city skyline are a peculiar and
effective form of communication they
have mastered the language we taught
them they learned that the use of
disproportionate and indiscriminate
violence against innocence is a way to
make a statement and we delivered the
same incendiary messages in Vietnam
Robert McNamara the Secretary of Defense
in 1965 defined the saturation bombing
of the north which
hundreds of thousands of civilians dead
as a means of communication to the
communist regime in Hanoi and we speak
this language in Iraq Afghanistan Syria
Pakistan Somalia and through our Saudi
proxies in Yemen the roots of even the
worst atrocities carried out by
jihadists have their origins in our
campaigns to colonize and subdue the
rest of the world it was the French
colonists who used waterboarding a
technique inherited from the Nazis on
Algerians we like the Soviets turned
psychological torture into a science
when we employ in black sites around the
world and in our prison system
Isis copying the masters of these dark
arts dress their Western hostages in
Guantanamo's orange suits and turn on
smartphone cameras before beheading
their victims the favored form of
execution of Muslims by the Crusaders if
we had not destroyed government
authority in Iraq Afghanistan Libyan
Syria leaving vast swaths of territory
to criminal gangs warlords and ad-hoc
militias there would have been no vacuum
for these radical jihadists to fill
George Santayana foresaw that America's
obsessive individualistic culture of
competition and mimicry would eventually
incite a lava wave of primitive
blindness and violence the inability to
be self-critical and self-aware coupled
with a cult of the self would lead to
collective suicide Karl cherski in fene
too sick Vienna politics and culture
wrote that Europe Europe's descent into
fascism was inevitable once it cut the
cord of consciousness
once we no longer acknowledge or
understand our capacity for evil once we
no longer know ourselves we become
monsters who devour others and finally
devour our own we are paying the price
for discarding hundreds of millions of
people onto the dung heap of history
unable to understand and cope with
reality we wage endless wars in the name
of democracy and Western civilization
which engendered or Mars to fuel the
violence we seek to crush we are
afflicted by what Albert Camus called
Auto intoxication the malignant
secretion of one's preconceived
impotence against the enclosure of the
self and until this ototoxic ation is
addressed the rage and violence at home
and abroad will expand as we stumble
towards a global apartment apocalypse
this slow-motion march towards
apocalypse is assured if we refuse to
confront the ecocide we are carrying out
on the planetary systems that sustain
human life seas and rivers are being
poisoned and emptied of their stocks of
fish wild fowl wild fires droughts
flooding monster hurricanes typhoons and
tsunamis along with soaring temperatures
and the evaporation of the polar ice
sheets along with glaciers ravaged the
planet this ecocide exacerbates the
breakdown of social structures fuels the
mass migration of the displaced and
refugees which in turn creates more
political instability
unchecked these forces will lead in many
parts of the globe to complete systems
breakdown the greatest existential
crisis of our time is to at once accept
the tragic reality before us and find
the courage to resist it is to
acknowledge that the world as we know it
will become harsher and more difficult
that human suffering will expand but
that we can if we fight back
perhaps reconfigure our lives in our
society to mitigate the worst savagery
dramatically reduce our carbon footprint
and save ourselves from complete
annihilation the power elites will do
nothing to save us to be hopeful in bad
times is not just foolishly romantic
Howard Zinn wrote it is based on the
fact that human history is a history not
only of cruelty but also of compassion
sacrifice courage and kindness what we
choose to emphasize in this complex
history will determine our lives if we
see only the worst it destroys our
capacity to do something if we remember
those times and places and there are so
many when people have behaved
magnificently this gives us the energy
to act and at least the possibility of
sending this spinning top of a world in
a different direction and if we do not
and if we do act in however small away
we don't have to wait for some grand
utopian future the future is an infinite
succession of presence and to live now
as we think human beings should live in
defy
of all that is bad around us is itself a
marvelous victory
this makes resistance immoral and an
existential imperative resistance
entails suffering
it requires self-sacrifice it accepts
that we may be destroyed it is not
rational
it is not about the pursuit of happiness
it is about the pursuit of freedom
resistance accepts that even if we fail
there is an inner freedom that comes
with defiance and perhaps this is the
only freedom and true happiness we will
ever know to resist evil is the highest
achievement of human life it is the
supreme act of love
it is to carry the cross as the
theologian James Caan reminds us and to
be acutely aware that what we are
carrying is also what we will die upon
most of those who resist Sitting Bull
Emma Goldman Malcolm X Martin Luther
King are defeated at least in the cold
calculation of the powerful and the
final and perhaps most important quality
of resistance as Cohn writes is that it
inverts the world's value system hope
rises up out of defeat those who resist
stand regardless of the cost with a
crucified this is their magnificence and
it is their power
the seductive inducements to conformity
money fame prizes generous grants huge
book contracts hefty lecture fees
important academic and political
positions and a public platform are
scorned by those who resist the rebel
does not define
success the way the elites defined
success
those who resist refused to kneel before
the idols of mass culture and the power
elites they are not trying to get rich
they do not want to be part of the inner
circle of the powerful they accept that
when you stand with the oppressed you
get treated like the oppressed the
inversion of the world's value system
makes freedom possible
those who resist are free not because
they have attained many things or high
positions but because they have so few
needs they sever the shackles used to
keep most people in bondage and this is
why the elites fear them the elites can
crush them physically but they cannot
buy them off the power elites attempt to
discredit those who resist they forced
them to struggle to make an income they
push them to the margins of society they
write them out of the official narrative
they deny them the symbols of status
they use the compliant liberal class to
paint them as unreasonable and utopian
but resistance is not fundamentally
political it is cultural it is about
finding meaning and expression in the
transcendent in the incongruities of
life music poetry theatre and art
sustained resistance by giving
expression to the nobility of rebellion
against overwhelming force what the
ancient Greeks called Fortuna which can
never altom utley be overcome art
celebrates the freedom and dignity of
those who defy malignant evil victory is
not inevitable or at least not victory
as defined by the powerful yet in every
act of rebellion we are free
it was the raw honesty of the blues
spirituals work chants that made it
possible for african-americans to endure
power is a poison it does not matter who
wields it the rebel for this reason as
an eternal heretic he or she will never
fit into any system the rebel stands
with the powerless and there will always
be powerless people there will always be
injustice and the rebel will always be
an outsider and resistance requires
eternal vigilance the moment the
powerful are no longer frightened the
moment the glare of the people is
diverted and movements let down their
guard the moment the ruling elites are
able to use propaganda and censorship to
hide their aims the gains made by
resistors roll backward we have steadily
been stripped of everything that
organized men and women who rose up in
defiance and were purged demonized and
killed by the capitalist elites achieved
with the New Deal the victories of
african-americans who paid with their
bodies and blood in making possible the
Great Society and ending legal
segregation also have been reversed the
corporate state makes no pretense of
addressing social inequality or white
supremacy it practices only the politics
of vengeance it uses coercion fear
violence police terror and mass
incarceration has its primary form of
social control our cells of resistance
will have to rebe rebuilt from scratch
the corporate state however is in
trouble it has no credibility all the
promises of the free market
globalization trickle-down economics of
benek
as a lie an empty ideology used to
satiate greed and the elites have no
counter-argument to their
anti-capitalist and anti imperialist
critics the attempt to blame the
electoral insurgencies in the United
States to ruling political parties on
Russian interference rather than massive
social inequality is a desperate ploy
the courtiers in the corporate press are
working feverishly day and night to
distract us from reality the moment the
elites are forced to acknowledge social
inequality is the root of our discontent
is the moment they are forced to
acknowledge their role in orchestrating
this inequality the US government
subservient to corporate power has
become a burlesque the last vestiges of
the rule of law are evaporating the
kleptocrats are pillaging and looting
like barbarian hordes programs
instituted to protect the common good
public education welfare and
environmental regulations are being
dismantled the bloated military sucking
the marrow out of the nation is
unassailable poverty is a nightmare for
half the people poor people of color a
gun down
with impunity in the streets our prison
system is filled with the destitute and
presiding over the chaos and dysfunction
is a political PT Barnum a president who
while we are being fleeced offers up one
bizarre distraction after another like
Barnum's Fiji mermaid there are no
shortage of artists intellectuals and
writers from Martin Buber and George
Orwell to James Baldwin who warned us
that this dystopian era was fast
approaching but in our Disney fide world
of intoxicating and endless images cult
of the self and willful illiteracy we
did not listen
sren kierkegaard argued that it was the
separation of intellect from emotion
from empathy that doomed Western
civilization for the soul has no role in
a technocratic society the communal has
been shattered the concept of the common
good obliterated greed is celebrated the
individual is a god the celluloid image
is reality the artistic and intellectual
forces that make transcendence and the
communal possible are belittled or
ignored the basest lusts are celebrated
as forms of identity and self-expression
progress is defined exclusively by
technological and material advancement
and this creates a collective despair
and anxiety that feeds and is fed by
glitter or noise and the false promises
of consumer culture idols the desperate
or the despair grows ever worse but we
never acknowledge our existential dread
as Kierkegaard understood the Pacific
character of despair is precisely this
it is unaware of being despair
those who resist are relentlessly
self-critical they ask the hard
questions that mass culture which
promises an unachievable eternal youth
Fame and financial success deflects us
from asking what does it mean to be born
what does it mean to live what does it
mean to die how do we live a life of
meaning what is justice what is truth
what is beauty
what does our past say about our
presence how do we defy radical evil we
are in the grip of what Kierkegaard
called sickness unto death the numbing
of the soul by despair that leads to
moral and physical debasement those who
are ruled by rational abstractions and
an aloof intellectualism Kierkegaard
argued are as depraved as those who
succumb to hedonism cravings for power
or violence and predatory sexuality we
achieve salvation when we accept the
impediments of the body and the soul the
limitations of being human yet despite
these limitations seek to do good this
burning honesty which means we always
exist on the cusp of despair leaves us
in Kierkegaard's words in fear and
trembling we struggle not to be brutes
while acknowledging we can never be
angels
we must act and then ask for forgiveness
we must be able to see our face in the
face of the oppressor Paul Tillich did
not use the word sin to mean an act of
immorality he like Kierkegaard defines
sin as a strange 'men for Tillich it was
our deepest existential dilemma sin was
our separation from the forces that give
us ultimate meaning and purpose in life
this separation Foster's alienation
anxiety meaningless and despair that are
preyed upon by mass culture as long as
we fold ourselves inward embrace a
perverted hyper individualism
that is defined by selfishness and
narcissism we will never overcome this
estrangement we will be separated from
ourselves from others
and from the sacred resistance is not
only about the battling of the forces of
darkness it is about becoming a whole
and complete human being it is about
overcoming estrangement it is about the
capacity to love it is about honoring
the sacred it is about dignity it is
about sacrifice
it is about courage and it is about
being free resistance to radical evil is
the pinnacle of human existence thank
you
thank you Chris
[Applause]
and thank you all again for being here
if you're we're gonna do a question
answer session and if you want to ask a
question you can start lining up here at
this mic depending on how long the line
is it'll it'll go this way into the
community room it's a lot to think about
it's scary you know bringing Chris here
it feels like group therapy right we're
figuring out what is going on in this
world and and how can we work together
what can we do to make it better can we
make it better and that's that's what
we're doing here at the sanctuary every
day again the the radio station is a
huge opportunity to amplify all of that
you can help us do that you can help us
by joining us on the air becoming a
volunteer and by donating again we need
$30,000 and we need it quickly so we can
build transmitters in Albany and
Schenectady and be bringing bright
intelligent independent thinking voices
that are not driven by corporate
interests to the airwaves
the airwaves are an extremely powerful
medium people are tuned in and listening
it's intimate and and it's an
opportunity it's one of the few places
where I've said this before where in
this day and age you might hear an
opinion that you don't already have so
please consider donating to this right
now if you're thinking about donating 50
bucks think about donating a thousand
dollars if that is terrifying and you
can't do that and it's just no bring it
down to 250 but try to stay there so
again we're gonna if please stand up and
line up if you have have a question is
this a line okay good so there's no
people here I
in the meantime I'm gonna have people
stationed along the side and we're gonna
pass a jar it's you know it's a worship
here it's it's it's sacred it's a it's
spiritual so I hope you'll you'll
contribute and thank you to Chris for
handing me a hundred dollars just you
know before he started speaking
[Applause]
there was a pleasure listening to you
and I every time we come to these kinds
of events I always have the same
question that I've never asked it's I
hope I'm verbalizing it I would bet $100
that less than 1% of the people here are
considered themselves like Republican or
conservative so so when I come to these
events I keep seeing the same you know
my group of people you know the same
kind of people
and I'm wondering you're you talked
about people feeling disenfranchised and
betrayed by the system and by their
leads and that's that's the kind of
people that supposedly voted for Trump
and in your message is recurring in your
writing of you know coming together in
focusing on helping each other I feel
like when you say that I always think of
the people that voted for Trump you know
the lower class you know poor uneducated
whatever you know there's that sector of
the population is and I'm not sure I'm
saying it correctly but what can we do
to bring that the power of those people
to they feel like they're part of us
like we're all together trying to
struggle in this world against the big
forces of capitalism and and you know
well we have rich we have to organize
around specific inch think issues that
make their lives better $15 minimum wage
universal health care as Saul Alinsky
said there are no permanent allies
there's only permanent power and that
means reaching out to people whose
political views we find distasteful and
even repugnant
but as Rosa Luxemburg understood
conversion takes place through acts of
empathy that are carried out to people
who are not your natural allies and when
you organize around those concrete
issues that is the starting point for
political consciousness and political
awakening and one of the things that
does disturb me is the kind of
dismissive tone towards that
disenfranchised white working-class i
don't defend what the flag-waving
Confederates do in the streets of
Charlottesville or anywhere else but
they are also victims and I would all
encourage you to go back and read the
great book brother to a dragonfly by
will Campbell who had been the Baptist
minister who in fact that picture of
walking the girls to school in Little
Rock for disregulation he's right next
to them in the south but it but but
became the chaplain to the clew Ku Klux
Klan in a sense that the the state seeks
to keep us polarized and divided and
we're not going to gain traction by
speaking them about to them about their
mythological past and because they've
retreated into the world of magical
thinking like the Christian Right we're
going to begin to break down that
ideology by concretely addressing those
forces that create that despair
at Chris my name is Ted Hartman I'm from
this area and I think anyone from this
area would would tell you that certainly
on a local level the Democratic Party
has a has a very strong hold over Albany
Albany Troy Schenectady there's been
machine politics in this area for
decades and my question to you is I
think like you I think we'll all agree
that the corporate powers have taken
over the Republican and Democratic
parties however it seems to me that like
a far-right white nationalist element
has taken over the Republican Party is
it do you think it's even worth our
effort or time to try to insert
socialists into the Democratic Party and
to try to take over that party because
they do have the mechanisms of power
even if even if they're not expressing
our views is it pi is it worth our time
and effort to try to try to insert
ourselves into though an in hijack sort
of their their power of mechanisms
because they've got voter rolls they've
got organization I don't think all of
the people that voted Republican last
time were people who are necessarily
white nationalist but they voted for
people who are white nationalist and so
is it possible for us to take over their
democratic party and serve socialists
and then and then use their mechanisms
of power to to go to try to enact what
we want to go No the Democratic Party is
a creation of Wall Street those who are
in power pelosi schumer are creatures of
that system they know that if they were
for instance to institute true campaign
finance reform they'd be out of a job
and we are watching the purges now
within the DNC of the Bernie Sanders
supporters because they would rather go
down then create an open system which
would knock them off their perches or
their platforms of power politics is a
game of fear I mean the last liberal
president we had was Richard Nixon not
because he was a liberal or had any
integrity or
but because he was frightened of
movements and we have to rebuild those
movements that's our goal and we have to
hold fast to moral imperatives and not
allow the establishment including the
Democratic Party to buy us off so you
had the beginnings of a very widespread
any war movement at the inception of the
Iraq war and what happened in 2004 they
went into hiatus to elect John Kerry who
assured us that he wouldn't have pulled
out of Fallujah and this is a big
mistake you know there's that great
scene in kissinger's memoirs don't buy
the book where Nixon and Kissinger are
looking out the window
I think it's 71 or something there's a
huge anti-war demonstration and the
White House has put empty city buses in
a ring around the White House to protect
themselves and Nixon's wringing his hand
and says Henry they're gonna break
through the barricades and get us and
that's where we want people in power to
be
hi Chris Dan Linda here
I'm curious and and it was very
interested in kind of the utility of the
the word resistance that you're using
through this and my question is so if
resistance is such a fundamental kind of
experience as a human does it kind of
presuppose that there will always be
something to resist against which is
equally as fundamental to our experience
yes I mean there's that great passage in
the in vastly Grossman's magnificent P
work life and fate one of the probably
the greatest work of fiction of the 20th
century out of Russia where he talks
about the power of human kindness I
don't I'm not gonna I'm gonna read it
but I don't want to butcher it Oh am i I
don't have my iPhone luckily where's
Megan is Megan around maybe she can she
find it for me it's called life and fate
you all have to do is put in vastly
grossman life and fate Chris Hedges and
you'll get it but but I think there yes
i know i i i i come out of Calvin I have
a very dark view I was a war
correspondent I have a very dark view of
human nature I I think evil will always
be there and it was an eternal battle on
our part to resist and you know I tell
the story of since I'm close to scary of
my dad who was a Presbyterian minister
and Schoharie all white as you know farm
communities he was very outspoken about
the civil rights supporting the civil
rights movement this was a time when
Martin Luther King was probably one of
the most hated men in America in rural
white enclaves like scary County he had
been a sergeant North Africa in World
War two but he came back from the war a
pacifist and was very active and
opposing the Vietnam War and the issue
for which he got pushed out of the
church
he was very outspoken about gay
it's his youngest brother was gay my
uncle and my father understood the pain
of being a gay man in the 50s and 60s
and that I was eight nine very important
time for me because he taught me that
you're not rewarded for positions of
virtue in fact you're usually punished
for them and what finally pushed the
institutional church over the edge was
his outspokenness about gay rights and
at the time I was a undergraduate at
Colgate and my father by the way there
was no gay gee BLT organization at
Colgate so my dad actually brought the
gay speakers down to the campus to have
meetings with students of which I would
join and finally he kept saying that you
have to build a public organization and
finally because they were too frightened
to come out of the closet he came down
one day and took me out to lunch and
told me that even though I wasn't gay I
had to found the G BLT Alliance at
Colgate which I did it met every and I
would go into the dining hall at
breakfast lunch or dinner the guy would
check off the my car and hand it back
and go so when the church told
him to stop he responded by holding an
Easter service for the G BLT community
at that time in the city of Syracuse we
had a church and he said marriage is a
sacrament it is not a reward for being a
heterosexual and any church that refuses
to honor the sacrament of marriage does
not deserve to call itself Christian and
he was out years later after being the
Middle East bureau chief for the New
York Times I was publicly denouncing
Bush's call to invade Iraq I was booed
off of a commencement stage lynched by
right-wing media
called into the New York Times and given
a formal written reprimand and told I
was no longer allowed to speak about the
war in Iraq and I realized and I had
been there 15 years it wasn't an easy
moment no one wants to leave their lose
their job but I realized at that moment
that I could muzzle myself in service to
my career but to do so would be to
betray my dad and I quit and when I
walked out the door that building for
the first time in my life I articulated
what it was my father had given me and
that was freedom I didn't need the New
York Times to tell me who I was I knew
who I was I was my father's son and in
the Christian faith we call that
resurrection and that is the power of
resistance which perhaps even my father
didn't see and it will always be there
and it those acts of resistance are what
father Daniel Berrigan told me when he
defined faith as the good drawing the
belief that the good draws to it the
good even if all the empirical evidence
around us says otherwise the Buddhists
call it karma but I've seen rebellion
Eastern Europe I was speaking at dinner
about watching The Velvet Revolution I
was every night in the Magic Lantern
theater with Vaslav Havel and dims beer
and all the people who would inherit the
government and the walls of Prague that
winter were filled with posters of the
charles university student yan Pollock
who to protest the soviet invasion in
1968 had gone to vent salah square and
lit himself on fire
and died four days later from his burns
his funeral which was a non-event was
never covered by the state media was
broken up by the police when his grave
became a shrine his body was exhumed
cremated his ashes were given to his
mother and she was told she was not
allowed to Ribery them and two weeks
after the communist government fell ten
thousand people marched to Red Army
Square and renamed at yon Pollock's
square I was in vents alas square when
Marta kuba Shova the great singer who
had sung the anthem of defiance a prayer
for Marta that was broadcast out over
the airwaves in 1968 and after the
imposition of the Soviet backed
government her recording stock was
destroyed she spent the intervening
years working on assembly line in a toy
factory she was banned from the airwaves
there were 500,000 people invents a la
square that night it was snowing when
she walked out on that balcony and began
to sing the prayer for Marta and every
check in that crowd knew every word that
is the power of resistance the moral
power of resistance that even for all
those people you think are asleep
somewhere here it
[Applause]
thank you Chris for being here did we
find Megan or maybe yeah yeah okay after
Reid's one of my favorite quotes
it's from vasily grossman and it's from
his book life and fate he was probably
the premier war correspondent in the
Soviet Union you read any account of
Stalingrad because he was in the front
lines they're gonna be quoting Grossman
and at the end of the war he carried
warn peace with him he went all the way
from Stalingrad to Berlin and he came to
the belief that any form of
totalitarianism any form of utopian
belief whether it's communism or fascism
is evil and he waited until Stalin died
attempted to publish the novel it wasn't
palatable it was seized he became a
non-person he died I think in 64 and
then it was until 1980 the manuscript
was smuggled out and published in Europe
and I think it's one of the finest books
of the 20th century Oh Megan you better
come up here I'm like useless with these
things
yeah okay we got it and this is this is
the quote from him my faith has been
tempered in hell my faith has emerged
from the flames of the crematoria from
the concrete of the gas chamber I have
seen that it is not man who is impotent
in the struggle against evil but the
power of evil that is impotent in the
struggle against man the powerlessness
of kindness of senseless kindness is the
secret of its immortality
it can never be conquered the more
stupid the more senseless the more
helpless it may seem the vaster it is
evil is impotent before it
prophets religious leaders reformers
social and political leaders are
impotent before it this dumb blind love
is man's meaning human history is not
the battle of good struggling to
overcome evil it is a battle fought by a
great evil struggling to crush a small
kernel of human kindness but if what is
human in human beings has not been
destroyed even now then evil will never
conquer
[Applause]
you